added draft for color and colormaps in Makie (#58)
JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience: contents/data_vis.md

Now, let's move on and do a plot with LaTeX strings and a custom theme.

### using LaTeXStrings.jl

> LaTeX support in Makie is also available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LaTeX support in `Makie.jl` is also available.
```

I think that we need to be consistent with previous subsections.

Well, what about different default colors or palettes.

> In our next section, we will see how to use again [Cycles](http://makie.juliaplots.org/stable/theming.html#Cycles) and know a little bit more about them, plus some additional keywords in order to achieve this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our next section, we will see how to use again [`Cycles`](http://makie.juliaplots.org/stable/theming.html#Cycles) and know a little bit more about them, plus some additional keywords in order to achieve this.
```

more consistency since it is a type

### Colors and Colormaps {#sec:makie_colors}

Choosing an appropiate set of colors or colorbar for your plot is an essential part when presenting results.
Using [Colors.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGraphics/Colors.jl) is supported in `Makie.jl`
so that you can used [names colors](https://juliagraphics.github.io/Colors.jl/latest/namedcolors/) or pass `RGB` or `RGBA` values.
Regarding colormaps, all those that work with [Plots.jl](https://github.com/JuliaPlots/Plots.jl) also do here.
Additionally, colormaps from [ColorSchemes.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGraphics/ColorSchemes.jl) and [PerceptualColourMaps.jl](https://github.com/peterkovesi/PerceptualColourMaps.jl) can also be used.
Worth knowing now, your can reverse a colormap by doing `Reverse(:colormap_name)`.
And obtain a transparent color or colormap with `color= (:red,0.5)` and `colormap = (:viridis, 0.5)`.

Different use cases will be shown next. Then we will difine a custom theme with new colors and a colorbar palette.

> By default `Makie.jl` has a predifined set of colors in order to cycle trought them automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default `Makie.jl` has a predefined set of colors in order to cycle trough them automatically.
```

> As shown in the previuos figures, where no specific color was set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown in the previous figures, where no specific color was set.
```

Overwritting these defaults is done by calling the keyword `color` in the plotting function and specifying a new color via a `Symbol` or `String`.
See this in action in the following example:

```jl
@sco JDS.set_colors_and_cycle()
```

Where, in the first two lines we have used the keyword `color` to specified our color.
The rest its using the default cycle set of colors. Later, we will learn how to do a custom cycle.

Regarding colormaps, we are already familiar with the keyword `colormap` for heatmaps and scatters.
Here, we show that a colormap can also be specified via a `Symbol` or a `String`, similar to colors.

> Or, even a vector of RGB colors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or, even a vector of `RGB` colors.
```

Let's do our first an example by calling colormaps as a `Symbol`, `String` and `cgrad` for categorical values.
See `?cgrad` for more information.

```jl
scolor = """
    figure = (;resolution = (400,300), font= "CMU Serif")
    axis = (; xlabel = L"x", ylabel = L"y", aspect= DataAspect())

    fig, ax, pltobj = CairoMakie.heatmap(rand(20,20); colorrange = (0,1),
        colormap = Reverse(:viridis), axis = axis, figure = figure)
    Colorbar(fig[1,2], pltobj, label = "Reverse colormap Sequential")
    fig
    label = "Reverse_colormap_sequential" # hide
    caption = "Reverse colormap sequential and colorrange." # hide
    Options(fig; filename=label, label, caption) # hide
    """
sco(scolor)
```

When setting a `colorrange` usually the values outside this range are colored with the first and last color from  the colormap.

> However, sometimes is better to specified the color that you want at both ends. We do that with `highclip` and `lowclip`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, sometimes is better to specify the color you want at both ends. We do that with `highclip` and `lowclip`:
```

```
using ColorSchemes
```

```jl
s = """
    figure = (;resolution = (400,300), font= "CMU Serif")
    axis = (; xlabel = L"x", ylabel = L"y", aspect= DataAspect())

    fig, ax, pltobj = CairoMakie.heatmap(randn(20,20); colorrange = (-2,2),
        colormap = "diverging_rainbow_bgymr_45_85_c67_n256",
        highclip = :black, lowclip = :white, axis = axis, figure = figure)
    Colorbar(fig[1,2], pltobj, label = "Diverging colormap")
    fig
    label = "diverging_colormap" # hide
    caption = "Diverging Colormap with low and high clip." # hide
    Options(fig; filename=label, label, caption) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

> But we mentioned that also RGB vectors are valid options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But we mentioned that also `RGB` vectors are valid options.
```

> For our next example you could pass the custom colormap _perse_ or use `cgrad` to force a categorical colorbar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our next example you could pass the custom colormap _perse_ or use `cgrad` to force a categorical `Colorbar`.
```

```
using ColorSchemes
```

```jl
scat = """
    figure = (;resolution = (400,300), font= "CMU Serif")
    axis = (; xlabel = L"x", ylabel = L"y", aspect= DataAspect())
    cmap = ColorScheme(range(colorant"red", colorant"green", length=3))
    mygrays = ColorScheme([RGB{Float64}(i, i, i) for i in [0.0,0.5,1.0]])

    fig, ax, pltobj = CairoMakie.heatmap(rand(-1:1,20,20);
        colormap = cgrad(mygrays, 3, categorical = true, rev = true), # cgrad and Symbol, mygrays,
        axis = axis, figure = figure)
    cbar = Colorbar(fig[1,2], pltobj, label = "Categories")
    cbar.ticks = ([-0.66,0,0.66], ["-1","0","1"])
    fig
    label = "categorical_colormap" # hide
    caption = "Categorical Colormap." # hide
    Options(fig; filename=label, label, caption) # hide
    """
sco(scat)
```

Lastly, the ticks in the colorbar for the categorial case are not centered by default in each color.
This is fixed by passing custom ticks, as in `cbar.ticks = (positions, ticks)`.

> The last situation is when passing a `tuple` of two colors to `colormap` as symbols, strings or a mix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last situation is when passing a tuple of two colors to `colormap` as symbols, strings or a mix.
```

vector above do not have a backtick, so this probably shouldn't also...

You will get an interpolated colormap between these two colors.

> Also, `hex` coded colors are also accepted. So, on top or our heatmap let's put one semi-transparent point using this.

Reviewer: Do we need a backtick in `hex`? Is is a type or function from Julia/Makie etc?

Author: it's a function from colours.

```jl
s2color2 = """
    figure = (;resolution = (400,300), font= "CMU Serif")
    axis = (; xlabel = L"x", ylabel = L"y", aspect= DataAspect())

    fig, ax, pltobj = CairoMakie.heatmap(rand(20,20); colorrange = (0,1),
        colormap = (:red, "black"), axis = axis, figure = figure)
    CairoMakie.scatter!(ax,[11],[11],color=("#C0C0C0", 0.5),markersize=150)
    Colorbar(fig[1,2], pltobj, label = "2 colors")
    fig
    label = "colormap_two_colors" # hide
    caption = "Colormap from two colors." # hide
    Options(fig; filename=label, label, caption) # hide
    """
sco(s2color2)
```

>  **Custom cycle**

Reviewer: Isn't this better to become a sub-header for the section instead of bold?

Author: Yes, I tried that, it dosen't look good at this level. Probably it we make Makie a chapter, then it will.

> Here, we could define a global `Theme` with a new cycle for colors, however that is not the recommend way to do it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we could define a global `Theme` with a new cycle for colors, however that is **not the recommend way** to do it.
```

Always have to be careful with these not stuff in the middle of the sentence. I have high-school traumas from nasty questions.

It's better to define a new theme and use as shown before.

> Lets define a new one with a `cycle` for `:color`, `:linestyle`, `:marker` and a new colormap default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lets define a new one with a `cycle` for `:color`, `:linestyle`, `:marker` and a new `colormap` default.
```

> Lets add this new attributes to our previuos `publication_theme`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lets add this new attributes to our previous `publication_theme`.
```

```jl
@sc new_cycle_theme()
```

> And apply it to a plotting function to see it in action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And apply it to a plotting function to see it in action.
```

It is the third time you are using "see it in action". I think we should change to another phrasing with the same meaning. What you think?

Author: Yes. Suggestions?

Reviewer: Let's dive in.

Here is a good example.

etc

```jl
@sc scatters_and_lines()
```

```jl
s = """
    with_theme(scatters_and_lines, new_cycle_theme())
    label = "custom_cycle" # hide
    caption = "Custom theme with new cycle and colormap." # hide
    Options(current_figure(); filename=label, caption, label) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

> At this point you should be able to have complete control over your colors, line styles, markers and colormaps for your plots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point you should be able to have **complete control** over your colors, line styles, markers and colormaps for your plots.
```

> Next, we will like to manage and control layouts at will as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we will dive into how to manage and control **layouts**.
```
